# Tools

Globally used mixins and functions.
It’s important not to output any CSS in the first 2 layers.

!> **Warning broken changes from 2.0.0**: Because we use modular imports,
the previously used `$global-` and local prefixes (like `$tools-`) were
removed, the variable names became shorter. Instead of those prefixes you
have to use the `settings` namespace for the global variables and the `_`
prefix for the local variables, like:

```scss
@use "../settings";
@use "../tools" as *;

$_line-height: 1.5;

.c-branding {
  @include type(settings.$heading1-font-size);

  color: settings.$color-brand;
  line-height: $_line-height;
  font-weight: 700;
  font-family: settings.$font-family-heading;
}
```

?> **Please note**: In this documentation we use the namespace aliases randomly for the
tools.

## Breakpoint Tool

Highly customizable breakpoint generator. Use it wherever you need it.

### Default breakpoints

Using the global default `$breakpoints` breakpoints map.

In 1.settings/_settings.breakpoints.scss:

```scss
$breakpoints: (
  small  : screen and (min-width: 480px),
  medium : screen and (min-width: 768px),
  large  : screen and (min-width: 1024px),
  xlarge : screen and (min-width: 1200px),
  xxlarge: screen and (min-width: 1400px)
);
```

In a component sass file:

```scss
.c-header {
  margin-right: 3rem;

  @include breakpoint(small) {
    margin-right: 0;
  }
}
 ```

### Custom breakpoints

Using a custom breakpoints map.

In 1.settings/_settings.breakpoints.scss:

```scss
$my-breakpoints : (
  small  : screen and (min-width: 320px),
  xlarge : screen and (min-width: 1280px)
);
```

In a component sass file:

```scss
.c-header {
  margin-right: 30px;

  @include breakpoint(xlarge, $my-breakpoints) {
    margin-right: 0;
  }
}
 ```

### Custom breakpoints without sizes

Using a custom breakpoints map without size.

You can use `null` value for breakpoint without size like orientation
only.

In 1.settings/_settings.breakpoints.scss:

```scss
$portrait : (
  null   : screen and (orientation: portrait),
  small  : screen and (orientation: portrait) and (min-width: 320px),
  xlarge : screen and (orientation: portrait) and (min-width: 1280px)
);
```

In a component sass file:

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.c-header {
  margin-right: 30px;

  @include breakpoint($portrait) {
    margin-right: 0;
  }
}
```

## Clearfix Tool

The clearfix utility is used on elements that need to automatically clear
their child elements. Use it wherever you need it.

In a component sass file:

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.entries {
  @include clearfix;
}
 ```

?> You can use it as css class too via
[Clearfix Utility](6.utilities.md#clearfix-utility):
6.utilities/_utilities.clearfix.scss`

## Color Tool

Shake.sass provides some mixins and functions for color calculations,
generations.

### Simple color pair generator

Add color then background color from Sass variables.

In a component sass file:

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.site__main {
  @include colors($body-color, $body-background);
}
```

## Container Tool

The container tool is responsible for creating smart, flexible and
responsive containers.

Here you can setup the default and custom containers with size
(`max-with`) and paddings. Then use it as mixin. But you can use these
containers as BEM based objects too via
[Container Object](4.objects.md#container-object):
4.objects/_objects.container.scss

### Container Settings

#### Default container gutter

Allows you to specify the default set of padding left and right of your
container. You can use a map in case you would like to specify
responsive gutter sizes.

```scss
@use "../settings";

$_container-gutter-default: settings.$gutter-default;
```

#### Default container size

Allows you to specify the default max-width of your container. You can
use a map in case you would like to specify a responsive size.

```scss
$_container-size-default: (
  null   : 90%,
  small  : 91%,
  medium : 93%,
  large  : 129.6rem
);
```

### Container mixin

With container mixin you can generate the default and custom sized
containers.

#### Default container

Just include the `make-container` mixin without parameters in a
component sass file:

```scss
@use "../tools";
.section__container {
  @include tools.make-container;
}
```

#### Custom container

You can define custom paddings and sizes (widths) but you can use the
default `$_container-gutter-default` and
`$_container-size-default` ones too.

In 2.tools/_tools.container.scss or a component sass file:

```scss
$_container-gutter-gallery : (
  null   : 1.2rem,
  medium : 2.4rem
);

$_container-size-gallery : (
  null   : 100%,
  medium : 102.4rem
);
```

In a component sass file:

```scss
@use "../tools";
.gallery__container {
  @include tools.make-container($padding: $_container-gutter-gallery, $size: $_container-size-gallery)
}
```

## CSS Box-model Tool

It provides CSS Box-model-related mixins.

### Square mixin

Use it, when you need similar width and height with square shape.

It accepts one parameter:
- `$value` - Amount of desired width and height in any unit.

```scss
@use "../tools";

.c-profile__image {
  @include tools.square(6rem);
}
```

### Rounding mixin

Use it, when you need to achieve the same four rounded corners.

It accepts one parameter:
- `$radius` - The radius value for all four corners.

```scss
@use "../tools";

input {
  @include tools.round(.4rem);
}
```

### Circle mixin

Use it, when you need similar width and height with circle shape.

It accepts one parameter:
- `$value` - Amount of desired width and height in any unit.

```scss
@use "../tools";

.c-profile__image {
  @include tools.circle(3rem);
}
```

## Form Tool

Form related mixins and functions.

### Placeholder mixin

With it, you can theme input placeholders easily for any browsers.

```scss
@use "../tools";

@include tools.input-placeholder {
  color: grey;
}
```

## Full Width Image Tool

It helps you to create full-width (mostly background) image.

For 100% width cover-filled (mostly background) images. Apply
it to an img element or use Utility version of it. You will
need a parent element with relative position.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.c-slider {
  &__slide {
    position: relative;

    img {
      @include full-width-image;
    }
  }
}
```

## Grid Tool

The Grid Tool is responsible for building a smart, flexible and responsive
grid. However, you can achieve this only by Sass mixins, so you won't need
css classes for that, but there is in
[Grid Object](4.objects.md#grid-object) where the base grid mixins has
already been included from here: `4.objects/_objects.grid.scss`.

We use Flexbox to create grid, so we don't generate too much css here,
only the essential ones. Then you can add to that more properties as you
need, like: `flex-direction`, `justify-content` or vertical spacing.

!> **IMPORTANT!** Don't use grid mixins alone only together, or it will
cause wrong paddings and even broke your layout! So please don't use
just `make-grid` or `make-column` alone only both together. In case of
you don't need the exact column withs (e.x. `25%`), just write custom
flexbox rules.

Let's see a semantic example for a typical responsive entry lister:

```html
<div class="o-container">
  <ul class="entry__list">
    <li class="entry">an entry</li>
    <li class="entry">an entry</li>
    <li class="entry">an entry</li>
    <li class="entry entry--double">an entry</li>
    <li class="entry">an entry</li>
  </ul>
</div>
```

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.entry__list {
  @include make-grid();

  flex-direction: row;
}

.entry {
  @include make-column();

  @include breakpoint(medium) {
    @include column-size(6,12);
  }

  @include breakpoint(large) {
    @include column-size(4,12);
  }

  &--double {
    @include breakpoint(medium) {
      @include column-size(6,12);
    }

    @include breakpoint(large) {
      @include column-size(8,12);
    }
  }
}
```

### Grid Settings

We use the default global gutters for gaps between columns. But you can
define additional gutters. There is an empty `$_grid-gutter-extra`
Sass map for that, but if you need, you can create more.

In 2.tools/_tools.grid.scss:

```scss
@use "../settings";

$_grid-gutter-default : settings.$gutter-default;
$_grid-gutter-extra   : ();
```

### Create Grid

With `make-grid` mixin you can create grid element from the parent of
columns element. In the most cases this will be the row element.
It has one parameter: the _gutter size_. By default this is the global
gutter. But you can add any value. In this way, if you don't want any
gutter, just type `0`.

#### Grid with default gutter

Just import the `make-grid` mixin without any parameters a component
sass file:

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.entry__list {
  @include make-grid();
}
```

?> Note: The default gutter comes from `1.settings/_settings.grid.scss`
and here we divide that by 2 for two sides.

#### Grid with custom responsive gutters

Define custom gutters in a custom sass map:

```scss
$_grid-gutter-extra: (
  null    : .6rem,
  medium  : 1.2rem,
  large   : 2.4rem
);
```

Then use it as parameter in a component sass file:

```scss
@use "../tools";

.entry__list {
  @include tools.make-grid($_grid-gutter-extra);
}
```

#### Grid with simple, non responsive gutters

If you don't need responsive values, you can pass it easily:

```scss
@use "../tools";

.entry__list {
  @include tools.make-grid(1.5rem);
}
```

#### Grid without any gutters (collapsed)

And finally if you don't need any padding/gutter just pass `0` as
parameter:

```scss
@use "../tools";

.entry__list {
  @include tools.make-grid(0);
}
```

### Create Columns for Grid

In the similar way to Grid with `make-column` mixin you can create
columns.
It has one parameter: the _gutter size_. By default this is the global
gutter. But you can add any value. In this way, if you don't want any
gutter, just type `0`. You have to you use the same value for gid and
column!

!> **Important! If you use custom gutters please use the same gutters for
`make-grid` and `make-column` mixins as well!**

#### Columns with default gutter

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.entry {
  @include make-column();
}
```

#### Columns with custom responsive gutters

Define custom gutters in a custom sass map:

```scss
$_grid-gutter-extra: (
  null    : .6rem,
  medium  : 1.2rem,
  large   : 2.4rem
);
```

Then use it as parameter in a component sass file:

```scss
@use "../tools";

.entry {
  @include tools.make-column($_grid-gutter-extra);
}
```

#### Columns with simple, non-responsive gutters

If you don't need responsive values, you can pass it easily:

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.entry {
  @include make-column(1.5rem);
}
```

#### Columns without any gutters (collapsed)

And finally if you don't need any padding/gutter just pass `0` as
parameter:

```scss
@use "../tools";

.entry {
  @include tools.make-column(0);
}
```

### Set Column size

Use the `column-size` mixin to set the size of columns. We use dedicated
mixin for this, so you can set individually for each columns and different
breakpoints.
It accept two parameter: the column size and the total number of the columns.
Actually it's a fraction, like: `4, 12` -> `4/12`; this means: four columns
of total twelve. (you will get 33.3333%).

```scss
@use "../2.tools/tools.grid" as grid;

.entry {
  @include grid.make-column();
  @include grid.column-size(4,12);
}
 ```

### Column offset

Use the `column-offset` mixin if you want to push or pull a column.
In normal way you can do this easily with custom left or right margins,
but if you want one or more column sized gap between columns, you can do
it easily with this mixin.
It has two required parameters to calculate the offset size: _the column
size_ and _the total number of the columns_.
There is an optionally third parameter too: _the position_ (before (`start`)
or after (`end`) of the column). By default before (`start`).

#### Push the column on left side

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.entry {
  @include make-column();
  @include column-size(3,12);

  &--center {
    @include column-offset(3,12);
  }
}
```

#### Pull the column on right side

```scss
@use "../tools";

.article__column--center {
  @include tools.make-column();
  @include tools.column-size(3,12);
  @include tools.column-offset(3,12, end);
}
```

## Internet Explorer Tool

A simple media query tool only for Microsoft Internet Explorer 10-11 browsers.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.o-container {
  @include ie {
    overflow: visible;
  }
}
```

## Link Tool

You can use it for easier theming anchor elements. It has some parameters:

- `$color`: Text color of the link.
- `$type`: The type of the color.
  - Choose `light` if the `$color` is light, and you want it become darker on `:hover`/`:active` state.
  - Choose `dark` if the `$color` is dark, and you want it become lighter on `:hover`/`:active` state.
- `$visited`: Optionally you can use the same effect for `:visited` state as `:hover`, `:focus` and
`:active` if you use here the `visited` string; default: `none`.
- `$text-decoration`: Optional text-decoration for `:link` and `:visited` states; default: `none`.*
- `$outline`: Optional outline for `:focus` state; default: `initial`.*

?> * If you want to change the default value for these optional parameters, you need to explicit write
the default value for the previous optional parameters too.

Given a color, use darken effect, use the same `:visited` color as `:link`, use different color for other states,
no `text-decoration`, use the browser's default `:focus` style:

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

a {
  @include link($color-link);
}
```

Given a color, use lighten effect, use the same `:visited` color as for other states, use
`text-decoration: underlined`, no `:focus` style:

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

a {
  @include link($color-link, dark, visited, underlined);
}
```

Given a color, use darken effect, use the same `:visited` color as for other states, no
`text-decoration`, given a `:focus` style:

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

 a {
   @include link($color-link, light, none, none, .8rem solid $color-outline);
 }
```

## Stretched Link Tool

Make any HTML element or a component clickable by "stretching" a nested
link via css.

Include `stretched-link` mixin to a link (`<a>` element) to make its
containing block clickable via a `::after` pseudo element.
In most cases, this means that an element with `position: relative;` that
contains a link with included `stretched-link` mixin is clickable.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.o-media {
  position: relative;

  &__link {
    @include stretched-link;
  }
}
```

You can use it as utility class too via
[Stretched Link Utility](6.utilities.md#stretched-link-utility):
6.utilities/_utilities.stretched-link.scss

## Text Tool

It's provided several text block related mixins. But there are available
as BEM classed utilities too. For inline text and typography tools see
at [Type Tool](#type-tool) section.

### Text-align Mixin

It's accept an obligatory and an optional parameter:

`$align`: Align value ex.: `left`.\
`$last`: Optional, align value for justify aligned last line.

#### Simple text align.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.c-button {
  @include text-align(center);
}
```

#### Align last line of a justify text.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.section__lead {
  @include text-align(justify, left);
}
```

### Text Overflow behaviors

#### Text Ellipsis

Overflow behavior: display an ellipsis to represent clipped text.
_Only works on single line text!_

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.article__lead {
  @include text-ellipsis;
}
 ```

#### Text Clip

Overflow behavior: truncate the text.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.article__lead {
  @include text-clip;
}
```

#### Text Break

Text may be broken at arbitrary points.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.article__body {
  @include text-break;
}
```

## Transitions Tool

### Global transition

Use this default _global_ mixin globally for all transitions by default:

```scss
@use "../2.tools/tools.transitions" as transitions;

.c-button {
  @include transitions.global-transition;
}
```

## CSS Triangle Tool

Generates a triangle pointing in a specified direction.

### Create Triangle mixin

I's accept 4 parameters:

- `$direction`: The direction the triangle should point. Accepts `up`,
`up-right`, `right`, `down-right`, `down`, `down-left`, `left` or
`up-left`.
- `$width`: Width of the triangle.
- `$height`: Height of the triangle.
- `$color`: Color of the triangle.

Example:

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.button__arrow {
  @include make-triangle(right, 1.5rem, 1rem, $color-secondary);
}
```

## Type Tool

Inline typography related mixins. For text block related mixins see at
[Text Tool](#text-tool) section.

### Responsive Type Tool

Type tool contains a mixin that helps you create smart, flexible and
responsive typography. Use it wherever you need it.

Type mixin accepts two parameters:

- `$sizes`: A Sass map that contains font sizes and line heights for breakpoints.
- `$breakpoints`: A Sass map that contains all the breakpoints. Default value is `settings.$breakpoints`.

```scss
@use "../settings";
@use "../tools" as *;

h1 {
  @include type($sizes, $breakpoints: settings.$breakpoints);
}
```

#### Font size typography

It will create a font size on `<h1>` tag that will have `16px`
`font-size`.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

h1 {
  @include type(1.6rem);
}
```

#### Font size and line height typography

It will create a font size on `<h1>` tag that will have `16px` `font-size`
and `20px` `line-height`.

```scss
@use "../tools";

h1 {
  @include tools.type(1.6rem 2rem);
}
```

#### Responsive font size typography

It will create a font size on `<h1>` tag that will have `12px` `font-size`
on mobiles and `16px` on tablets and up.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

h1 {
  @include type(
    (
      null : 1.2rem,
      small: 1.6rem
    )
  );
}
```

#### Responsive font size typography with line height

It will create a font size on `<h1>` tag that will have `12px` `font-size`
and `16px` `line-height` on mobiles and `16px` `font-size` and `20px`
`line-height` on tablets and up.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

h1 {
  @include type(
    (
      null : (1.2rem, 1.6rem),
      small: (1.6rem, 2rem)
    )
  );
}
```

### Font Antialiasing

Makes font thickness to look the same in Firefox and Webkit.
You can set this globally too in `3.base/_base.reset.scss`.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

h1 {
  @include font-smooth;
}
```

## Visibility Tool

Control the visibility, without modifying the display, of elements with
visibility tools. These are available as BEM classed utilities too via
[Visibility Utility](6.utilities.md#visibility-utility): 6.utilities/_utilities.visibility.scss.

### Visually Hidden

Use `visually-hidden` mixin to hide elements on all devices except screen
readers.

```scss
@use "../tools" as *;

.page__title {
  @include visually-hidden;
}
```

### Focusable Visually hidden

Use in conjunction with `visually-hidden` to only display content when
it's focused. Useful for "_Skip to main content_" links. More info at
[W3C.org]( https://www.w3.org/TR/2013/NOTE-WCAG20-TECHS-20130905/G1).

```scss
@use "../tools";

.skip-navigation {
  @include tools.visually-hidden;
  @include tools.visually-hidden--focusable;
}
```
