# Base

Base styles are the default styles of base elements. It's a combination of
ITCSS's Generic and Elements layers.

A Base rule is applied to an element using an element selector, a
descendant selector, or a child selector, along with any pseudo-classes.
It doesn’t include any class or ID selectors. Base styles are related to
the basic styles of an application, like Typography, Reset and styling
of global elements.

This is the first layer which generates actual css.

Here you can find the default values.

!> **Warning broken changes from 2.0.0**: Because we use modular imports,
the previously used `$global-` and local prefixes (like `$tools-`) were
removed, the variable names became shorter. Instead of those prefixes you
have to use the `settings` namespace for the global variables and the `_`
prefix for the local variables, like:

```scss
@use "../settings";
@use "../tools" as *;

$_line-height: 1.5;

.c-branding {
  @include type(settings.$heading1-font-size);

  color: settings.$color-brand;
  line-height: $_line-height;
  font-weight: 700;
  font-family: settings.$font-family-heading;
}
```

## Reset

Improved [Normalize.css](https://github.com/necolas/normalize.css) with
some goodness:

- Sass variables,
- switchable components:
  - heading font-size reset,
  - small font-size reset,
  - list bullets remover,
  - table element,
  - form elements,
  - font antialiasing
- best practices
- no static values
- compatible with [Stylelint](https://stylelint.io/user-guide/rules) rules.

Compatible with IE10+.

### Heading font size

Makes all heading tags (`<h1>` - `<h6>`) to be equal to your body size.
It forces you to use heading tags with focus on your semantics and not
on the way they look.

```scss
$_heading-size: true;
```

### Small element font size

Makes small tag to be equal to your body size.
It forces you to use heading tags with focus on your semantics and not
on the way they look.

```scss
$_small-size: true;
```

### Font Antialiasing

Makes font thickness to look the same in Firefox and Webkit.
You can set it individually too with `font-smooth` mixin.

```scss
$_font-antialiasing: false;
```

### Code font family

Use font-family setting for all code HTML tags.

```scss
@use "..settings";

$_code-font-family: settings.$font-family--monospace;
```

### List bullets remover

Bullets remover from HTML unordered (`ul`), ordered (`ol`) lists and menu
element. Set it to false if you don't want to use bullets. Encourages the use
of `ul` , `ol` and `menu` for any listed elements in any styles, like a
navigation menu and not only for bullet lists.

```scss
$_list-bullets: true;
```

### Table normalizer

Normalize `<table>` elements.

```scss
$_table-normalize: true;
```

### Full width images

Optionally make all images full width to fill the parent container.

```scss
$_full-width-images: false;
```

### HTML4 Form Elements

Enables normalize and resets for the HTML4 form elements.
Turn off if you don't use any HTML4 form elements.

```scss
$_form-elements: true;
```

### HTML5 Form Elements

Enables normalize and resets for the HTML5 form elements, like
`<input type="number">` or `<progress>`.
Turn off if you don't use any HTML5 form elements.

```scss
$_html5-form-elements: true;
```

### Button element reset

Reset the appearance of the button element:

- Remove the border, padding, appearance and background,
- Set the the color to currentColor,
- Set cursor to pointer.

```scss
$_button-element: false;
```

## Page Element

Theming page (`<html>`, `<body>`) and all (`*`) elements.

### Body element

## Body colors

Set text- and background-color to body. Turn this off if you need anything
else background property than background-color, like background-image.

```scss
@use "../settings";

$_body-colors           : true;
$body-color             : settings.$color-text;
$body-background-color  : settings.$color-background;
```

## Fonts Element

You can use custom webfonts. Here you can find a sample `@fontface`
declaration. Then you can you them in 1.settings/_settings.type.scss.

## Type Element

Theming text elements.

### Global selected text

```scss
@use "../settings";

$_selected-text            : true;
$_selected-text-color      : settings.$color-light;
$_selected-text-background : settings.$color-tertiary;
```

### Paragraph margins

```scss
$_paragraph-margins     : true;
$_paragraph-margin-size : 1em;
```

### Inline and Code Blocks

```scss
$_code-tab-size : 2;
```

### Classless typography settings

```scss
// Responsive font-size
$_classless-headings-fontsize       : true;

// Heading font-family
$_classless-headings-fontfamily     : true;

// Margins and padding for ordered and ordered lists
$_classless-lists-margins-paddings  : true;

// link element (see details below)
$_classless-link-element            : true;
```

### Global Link Element

```scss
@use "../settings";

// :link, :visited states
$_link-color                : settings.$color-primary !default;

// link color type @see link mixin in 2.tools/_link
$_link-type                 : light !default;

// :visited state effect @see link mixin in 2.tools/_link
$_link-visited              : visited !default;

// underlined links
$_link-text-decoration      : none !default;

// outlined links in :focus state
$_link-outline              : none !default;
```
