# Objects

Class-based selectors which define undecorated design patterns,
for example media object known from OOCSS. They provide structure to your
content, do not contain any cosmetic CSS, and they should never been
directly overwritten.

This is the first layer in which we find class-based selectors. These are
concerned with styling non-cosmetic design patterns, or 'objects'. Objects
can range from something as simple as a .wrapper element, to layout
systems, through to things.

!> **Warning broken changes from 2.0.0**: Because we use modular imports,
the previously used `$global-` and local prefixes (like `$tools-`) were
removed, the variable names became shorter. Instead of those prefixes you
have to use the `settings` namespace for the global variables and the `_`
prefix for the local variables, like:

```scss
@use "../settings";
@use "../tools" as *;

$_line-height: 1.5;

.c-branding {
  @include type(settings.$heading1-font-size);

  color: settings.$color-brand;
  line-height: $_line-height;
  font-weight: 700;
  font-family: settings.$font-family-heading;
}
```

## Container Object

The container object is responsible for creating smart, flexible and
responsive containers.

For default container you can use the `make-container` mixin from
`2.tools/_tools.container.scss`. Here we add a css class for that.
You can set up here for additional container sizes and paddings.

?> Learn more about [Container Tool](2.tools.md#container-tool).

?> You can find an easily modify all settings in
`4.objects/_objects.container.scss`:

### Container namespaces

```scss
$_container-class     : "o-container";
$_container-class-mod : $_container-class + "--";
```

### Container with default responsive gutter

It will create a default container with `10px` padding in mobile and
`20px` in tablets and up.

```scss
$_container-gutter-default: (
  null : 1rem,
  small: 2rem
);
```

### Container with responsive size

It will create a container that will have max-width of `320px` in mobile
and `max-width` of `1024px` in tablets and up.

```scss
$_container-size-default: (
  null : 32rem,
  small: 102.4rem
);
```

### Additional container gutters

Allows you to specify more sets of padding left and right of your
container.
You can use a nested map in case you would like to specify responsive
gutter sizes.

Each gutter size will be available as a BEM modifier that will be named
according to the gutter name.

```scss
$_container-gutter-extra : ();
```

For example if `$_container-gutter-extra: (large: 3rem);`
then `.o-container--large` will be available for use:

```scss
$_container-gutter-extra: (
  large: (
    null : 2rem,
    small: 4rem
  )
);
```

```html
<div class="o-container--large">...</div>
```

### Additional container sizes

Allows you to specify more sets of `max-width` for your container. You can
use a nested map in case you would like to specify a responsive size.

Each gutter size will be available as a BEM modifier that will be named
according to the container size name.

```scss
$_container-size-extra: ();
```

For example if `$_container-size-extra: (large: 160rem);`
then `.o-container--large` will be available for use:

```scss
$_container-size-extra: (
  large: (
    null : 30rem,
    small: 120rem
  )
);
```

```html
<div class="o-container--large">...</div>
```

## Grid Object

The Grid Object is responsible for building a smart, flexible and
responsive grid. However, you can achieve this only by Sass mixins, so
basically you won't need css classes for that, but here in Grid Object
the base grid mixins has already been included from [Grid Tool](2.tools.md#grid-tool).
So you won't need to repeat the basic stuff.

Use it when you need to use object elements for layout purposes instead
of `@include` grid mixins on semantic elements. There is a `.o-grid`
class for the flexbox based grid element (mostly the row layout element),
and it's direct child: `.o-grid__item` (mostly the column layout elements).
These elements only contains the base, you still have to write in Sass
the other rules, like `flex-direction` or item sizes.

In a component HTML file:

```html
<div class="o-grid">
  <div class="o-grid__item">
    Column
  </div>

  <div class="o-grid__item">
    Column
  </div>
</div>
```

In a component Sass file:

```scss
.o-grid {
  flex-direction: row;
}

.o-grid__item {
  @include breakpoint(medium) {
    @include column-size(6,12);
  }

  @include breakpoint(large) {
    @include column-size(4,12);
  }

  &--double {
    @include breakpoint(medium) {
      @include column-size(6,12);
    }

    @include breakpoint(large) {
      @include column-size(8,12);
    }
  }
}
```

!> **IMPORTANT!** Don't use `.o-grid` or `.o-grid__item` alone, only
together, or it will cause wrong paddings and even broke your layout!
For example if you want a grid wrapper class, but don't need to exact columns
(`.o-grid-item`) don't use `.o-grid` class for wrapper.

### Grid Object settings

?>  If you want to use from Sass only, all settings found in:
[Grid Tool](2.tools.md#grid-tool): 2.tools/_tools.grid.scss.

### Grid namespaces

```scss
$_grid-class     : "o-grid";
$_grid-class-mod : $_grid-class + "--";
```

### Additional Grid gutters

If you use additionally Container object with custom gutters
you have to set custom those custom gutters for Grid object too!

You can use a nested map in case you would like to specify
responsive gutter sizes.

Each gutter size will be available as a BEM modifier that will be
named according to the gutter name.

Example if `$_grid-gutter-extra: (large: 30px);`
then `.o-grid--large` will be available for use.

```scss
$_grid-gutter-extra: (
  large: (
    null : 2rem,
    small: 4rem
  )
);
```

In a component HTML file:

```html
<div class"o-grid--large">
  <div class="o-grid--large__item">
    Column
  </div>

  <div class="o-grid--large__item">
    Column
  </div>
</div>
```

## Media Object

The Media object is responsible for a common design pattern where there is a
fixed and a fluid width column next to each other. It's used to build the
structure of sidebars, comments, avatar and other similar UI components.

It's a css class based object, so there aren't any Sass tool for that.
Just enable the needed options in 4.objects/_objects.media.scss then
use the corresponded css lasses in the html.

?> You can find an easily modify all settings in
4.objects/_objects.media.scss:

### Media Object namespaces

```scss
$_media-fixed                : "fixed";
$_media-fluid                : "fluid";
$_media-reversed            : "reversed";
$_media-align-middle        : "middle";
$_media-align-bottom        : "bottom";
$_media-responsive          : "responsive";

$_media-class-media         : "o-media";
$_media-class-media-mod     : $_media-class-media + "--";
$_media-class-media-fixed    : $_media-class-media + "__" + $_media-fixed;
$_media-class-media-fluid    : $_media-class-media + "__" + $_media-fluid;
```

### Default Media Object

```html
<div class="o-media">
  <div class="o-media__fixed">
    Fixed width column
  </div>

  <div class="o-media__fluid">
    Fluid width column
  </div>
</div>
```

### Media Object with responsive gutter size

Use a number for a single size or a map for a responsive size.

```scss
@use "../settings";

$_media-gutter-default : settings.$gutter-default;
```

For example, it creates a default media object with `10px` gutter in mobile and `20px`
in tablets and up.

In 4.objects/_objects.media.scss:

```scss
$_media-gutter-default: (
  null : 1rem,
  small: 2rem
);
```

In a component HTML file:

```html
<div class="o-media">
  <div class="o-media__fixed">
    Fixed width column
  </div>

  <div class="o-media__fluid">
    Fluid width column
  </div>
</div>
```

### Media Object with extra gutter size

Each gutter size will be available as a modifier that will be named
according to the gutter name.

Use a map for a single size or a nested map for a responsive size.

For example if `$_media-gutter-extra: ("compact": "1rem");`
then `.o-media--compact` will be available for use.

```scss
$_media-gutter-extra : ();
```

For example, it creates a new gutter size named 'small' that will have
`5px` gutter size.

In 4.objects/_objects.media.scss:

```scss
$_media-gutter-extra: (
  small: .5rem
);
```

In a component HTML file:

```html
<div class="o-media o-media--small">
  <div class="o-media__fixed">
    Fixed width column
  </div>

  <div class="o-media__fluid">
    Fluid width column
  </div>
</div>
```

#### Media Object with extra responsive gutter size

It creates a new gutter size named 'small' that will have `5px` gutter
size in mobiles and `10px` in tablets and up.

In 4.objects/_objects.media.scss:

```scss
$_media-gutter-extra: (
  small: (
    null : .5rem,
    small: 1rem
  )
);
```

In a component HTML file:

```html
<div class="o-media o-media--small">
  <div class="o-media__fixed">
    Fixed width column
  </div>

  <div class="o-media__fluid">
    Fluid width column
  </div>
</div>
```

### Reverse columns order for Media

Enable / Disable reversed modifier.

- `.o-media--rev`: Reverse columns order

```scss
$_media-is-reversed : false;
```

For example, it creates media object that has the fixed part on the
right and the fluid on the left.

In 4.objects/_objects.media.scss:

```scss
$_media-is-reversed: true;
```

In a component HTML file:

```html
<div class="o-media o-media--reversed">
  <div class="o-media__fixed">
    Fixed width column on the right
  </div>

  <div class="o-media__fluid">
    Fluid width column on the left
  </div>
</div>
```

### Media alignment

Enable / Disable alignment modifiers.

- `.o-media--middle`: Align columns at _middle_ vertically
- `.o-media--bottom`: Align columns at _bottom_ vertically.

```scss
$_media-is-aligned : false;
```

### Responsive Media

Enable / Disable responsive modifier for the media object.

- `.o-media--responsive`: Collapse fluid section bellow fixed one, at a specific
`max-width` breakpoint.

```scss
$_media-is-responsive : false;
```

For example, it creates media object that will automatically collapse
in two rows when a max-width of `767px` presents.

In 4.objects/_objects.media.scss:

```scss
$_media-collapses-at: 767px; // This is not needed since 767px is the default value
$_media-responsive: true;
```

In a component HTML file:

```html
<div class="o-media o-media--responsive">
  <div class="o-media__fixed">
    Fixed width column
  </div>

  <div class="o-media__fluid">
    Fluid width column
  </div>
</div>
```

### Collapsing Media

Specify `max-width` for a breakpoint to collapse at.

```scss
$_media-collapse-at : 76.7rem;
```
